$Id: design_notes.txt,v 1.1 2003/03/22 03:24:12 ifindkarma Exp $

Server

A PubSub server accepts event notifications, and routes the resulting
messages to interested subscribers. PubSub servers are usually visible
at one or more HTTP or HTTP/S URLs, e.g. http://127.0.0.1:8000/kn or
http://oyster.knownow.com/mod_pubsub/cgi-bin/pubsub.cgi. Reverse-proxying,
virtual hosting, URL-rewriting, clustering, and shared event stores
often lead to a particular server accepting requests from multiple
URLs.

Cache

Each PubSub server has a cache of messages categorized by topic,
and allows clients to notify the cache of updates using PubSub
commands. As a side-effect, some cache updates cause an update
notification to be propagated along cached routes. Some PubSub servers
have private caches, while others share their caches with other
servers. There is no guarantee of consistency for updates to message
caches.

A PubSub server also allows queries to be run against the cache.

Topic

Each message is cached in the context of a particular namespace, or
"topic". A topic is specified by a URI. Topic URIs contain two parts:
a server URL [which may optionally be omitted], and a topic name. The
server URL is typically an HTTP or HTTP/S URL, as explained above. A
topic URI with no server URL (e.g. "/what/chat" or "/who/bob") is
called "non-absolute", and is not directly usable as an HTTP or HTTP/S
URL; a topic URI with a server URL
(e.g. "http://127.0.0.1/kn/what/chat" or
"http://oyster.knownow.com/mod_pubsub/cgi-bin/pubsub.cgi/who/bob") is
called "absolute", and may be used directly as an HTTP URL.

The topic name consists of a leading "/", followed by a list of zero
or more name segments in hierarchical pathname style, with "/"
separating levels of the hierarchy, for example "/what/chat",
"/what/chat/kn_routes", "/what/chat/kn_routes/kn_subtopics",
"/knownow.com/kn_subtopics", "/who/anonymous/s/437583/kn_journal",
"/tempuri.org/soap_chat", or
"/knownow.com/who/scott/apps/yew/buddies". Use of an extra trailing
"/" is discouraged.

Topic name segments are non-empty sequences of lower-case ASCII
identifier characters (letters "a"..."z", digits "0"-"9", "." and "_")
and non-ASCII characters. Topic name segments should not start or end
with ".". Topic name segments starting with "kn_" generally have
special uses and should only be used as specified by the PubSub
protocol; special segment names common in current use include
"kn_routes", "kn_subtopics", and "kn_journal". The last segment of a
topic name determines the topic type. Note that not all PubSub servers
currently enforce all of these topic naming restrictions.

By convention, topic names with one or more "." characters in the
first segment (e.g. "/knownow.com/who/adam" or
"/tempuri.org/soapDemo") are used for organization-owned topic space;
use of such a topic name should be coordinated with the owner of that
part of the Domain Name System (DNS). Note that all such names are
assumed to be absolute, so the trailing "." from DNS should be
omitted.

Although topic URIs sometimes look like URLs, they need not
refer to any specific location on the Web.

Message

Messages contain an opaque payload (often treated as if it were a
value associated with a special header named "kn_payload") and a set
of free-form name-value pair headers. Header names starting with "kn_"
generally have special uses and should only be used as specified by
the PubSub protocol.

Some regular header names have meanings established by
convention. Examples include "userid" (machine-readable name for the
user responsible for generating the message,) "displayname"
(human-readable name for the user responsible for generating the
message,) "content-type" (MIME-style type specification for the
message payload,) "who" (user or users this message pertains to,)
"where" (locations this message pertains to,) "when" (times and/or
dates this message pertains to,) "what" (objects this message pertains
to,) "html_payload" (HTML view of this message's plain-text payload,)
"reply-to" (topic URI a response message should be delivered to,)
"reply-uri" ("kn_uri" and "kn_route_location" a response message
should include,) and "subject" (general subject of this message.)
Header names may include hierarchical prefices in the same format as
topic names, e.g. "/knownow.com/apps/chat/ringtone_style".

Refer to the PubSub protocol documentation for the current list of
assigned special headers. The most commonly used are "kn_id" (unique
ID for this message; value restricted using the same rules as a topic
name segment,) "kn_time_t" (message creation time, expressed as a
floating-point time in seconds since the beginning of January 1st,
1970 (GMT),) "kn_expires" (desired expiration time, either as an
absolute time in the same format as "kn_time_t", or as "+" followed by
a non-negative floating-point offset from the "kn_time_t" value,)
"kn_uri" (URI for this message, often derived by appending "/" and the
"kn_id" value to the absolute URI of the topic this message was
originally created in; not necessarily unique.)

Any particular PubSub server is free to keep messages in its cache for
any length of time; clients may suggest lifetimes using the special
header named "kn_expires", but a PubSub server generally makes no
guarantees about the lifetimes of cache entries.

Events

Messages in regular topics (i.e. those whose final topic name segments
do not have a "kn_" prefix) are called "events". The meaning of their headers 

Routes are similar to notifications, but 

do_method=route with a kn_to matching /^javascript:.*/ or an omitted
kn_to requests a tunnel route. Tunnel routes deliver events over the
requesting connection until the connection closes.

